Explaining the changes in multi-assignments (#227)
crystal-lang/crystal-website: _releases/2022-01-06-1.3.0-released.md

## Multi-Assign

Multiple assignments got improved in various ways. First, it's possible to take a "splat of elements" in a multi-assignment:

<div class="code_section">{% highlight crystal %}
n_first, *n_s, n_last = [1, 2, 3, 4, 5]       # n_s is [2, 3, 4]
*t_s, t_last = {"This", 15, 4, "tuple", true} # t_s is {"This", 15, 4, "tuple"}
{% endhighlight %}</div>

> Second, it's possible to detect unbalanced multi-assignments:

Reviewer: I'd mention the opt-in restriction right at the start, to make it clear that the following example does not show the default behaviour:
```suggestion
Second, there's an optional preview feature to detect unbalanced multi-assignments. It can be enabled with the compiler flag `-Dstrict_multi_assign`.
```

<div class="code_section">{% highlight crystal %}

> not, that, many = [1, 2]    # Multiple assignment count mismatch (IndexError)

Reviewer: This is a bad example because the flag doesn't have much effect at runtime (for typical `Indexable` implementations, that is).
Both enabled and disabled raises `IndexError`. Only difference is the message (`Multiple assignment count mismatch` vs. `Index out of bounds`) and location (user code vs. `Indexable#[]`).
I don't think this part of the change is even *worth* mentioning because if that.

Instead, we should use an example of a compile time error. Borrowed and updated from the PR:
```suggestion
a, b, c = {1, 2} # Error: index out of bounds for Tuple(Int32, Int32) (2 not in -2..1)
a, b = {1, 2, 3} # Error: cannot assign Tuple(Int32, Int32, Int32) to 2 targets
```

Reviewer: Btw. that first error message looks odd. I don't think that's intended 🤔 
It should be `cannot assign Tuple(Int32, Int32) to 3 targets`.

Reviewer: https://github.com/crystal-lang/crystal/issues/11695

{% endhighlight %}</div>

> ⚠️ This second improvement is a breaking change; therefore, you need to enable it with the flag `-Dstrict_multi_assign`. We encourage to do so to detect possible errors in your code, and to prepare to 2.0, which likely will include it by default. An additional restriction guarded by that flag is that if the right-hand side has a unique element, it must be of type `Indexable` or `Enumerable`.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
⚠️ This second improvement is a breaking change; therefore it's not enabled by default. We encourage using it to detect possible errors in your code. This setting will likely be the default in 2.0. An additional restriction guarded by that flag is that if the right-hand side has a unique element, it must be of type `Indexable` or `Enumerable`.
```

## Multi-Assign

Multiple assignments got improved in various ways. First, it's possible to take a "splat of elements" in a multi-assignment:

<div class="code_section">{% highlight crystal %}
# Splat in multi-assign with array
first, *rest, last = [1, 2, 3, 4, 5]
first # => 1
rest # => [2, 3, 4]
last # => 5
{% endhighlight %}</div>

<div class="code_section">{% highlight crystal %}
# Splat in multi-assign with tuple
*rest, last = {"This", 15, 4, "tuple", true}
rest # => {"This", 15, 4, "tuple"}
last # => true
{% endhighlight %}</div>

Second, there's an optional preview feature to detect unbalanced multi-assignments. It can be enabled with the compiler flag `-Dstrict_multi_assign`.

<div class="code_section">{% highlight crystal %}

> a, b, c = {1, 2} # Error: index out of bounds for Tuple(Int32, Int32) (2 not in -2..1)

Reviewer: See previous comment: https://github.com/crystal-lang/crystal-website/pull/227#discussion_r777708890

> a, b, c = {1, 2} # Error: index out of bounds for Tuple(Int32, Int32) (2 not in -2..1)

Author: but if this errs in 1.2.2, then we should probably remove this example and leave the second one?

> a, b, c = {1, 2} # Error: index out of bounds for Tuple(Int32, Int32) (2 not in -2..1)

Reviewer: I'd still leave this as reference. "This was already an error before for too many values, now there's this error when there are too many values."

a, b = {1, 2, 3} # Error: cannot assign Tuple(Int32, Int32, Int32) to 2 targets
{% endhighlight %}</div>

⚠️ This second improvement is a breaking change; therefore it's not enabled by default. We encourage using it to detect possible errors in your code. This setting will likely be the default in 2.0. An additional restriction guarded by that flag is that if the right-hand side has a unique element, it must be of type `Indexable` or `Enumerable`.

> 

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion

If you actually relied on ignoring the "overflow" items, this syntax will achieve the old behavior:

<div class="code_section">{% highlight crystal %}
a, b, *_ = [1, 2, 3]
# Same as the old: a, b = [1, 2, 3]
{% endhighlight %}</div>
```

Reviewer: Good addition. But I think this should be moved up at the end of the first part. And instead of a vague "this syntax", I'd explicitly call the underscore splat target.

## Multi-Assign

> Multiple assignments got improved in various ways. First, it's possible to take a "splat of elements" in a multi-assignment ([#10410](https://github.com/crystal-lang/crystal/pull/10410)):

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Multiple assignments got improved in various ways. First, it's possible to use a splat target in a multi-assignment ([#10410](https://github.com/crystal-lang/crystal/pull/10410)):
```

<div class="code_section">{% highlight crystal %}
# Splat in multi-assign with array
first, *rest, last = [1, 2, 3, 4, 5]
first # => 1
rest # => [2, 3, 4]
last # => 5
{% endhighlight %}</div>

<div class="code_section">{% highlight crystal %}
# Splat in multi-assign with tuple
*rest, last = {"This", 15, 4, "tuple", true}
rest # => {"This", 15, 4, "tuple"}
last # => true
{% endhighlight %}</div>

To take the first and last element, it is possible to use the _underscore splat_ notation:
<div class="code_section">{% highlight crystal %}
# Ignoring the elements in the middle
first, *_, last = {"This", 15, 4, "tuple", true}
first # => "This"
last # => true
{% endhighlight %}</div>

Second, there's an optional preview feature to detect unbalanced multi-assignments ([#11145](https://github.com/crystal-lang/crystal/pull/11145)). It can be enabled with the compiler flag `-Dstrict_multi_assign`.
<div class="code_section">{% highlight crystal %}

> a, b, c = {1, 2} # Error: index out of bounds for Tuple(Int32, Int32) (2 not in -2..1)
> a, b = {1, 2, 3} # Error: cannot assign Tuple(Int32, Int32, Int32) to 2 targets

Reviewer: ```suggestion
a, b = {1, 2, 3} # Error: cannot assign Tuple(Int32, Int32, Int32) to 2 targets
a, b, c = {1, 2} # Error: index out of bounds for Tuple(Int32, Int32) (2 not in -2..1) (This was already an error before)
```

Author: What's the point of this swap? It's inconsistent with the following paragraph.

Reviewer: Eh, the swap is irrelevant 🙈 It's about adding a note that the error for `a, b, c = {1, 2}` is not new.

{% endhighlight %}</div>

Note that the first example fails with a similar error in 1.2.2 (this error is [expected to change](https://github.com/crystal-lang/crystal/issues/11695) in the near future).

> To ignore the extra items in strict mode you can use the underscore splat notation:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
To ignore the extra items in strict mode you can use the underscore splat notation. This can be used to port existing code to work with the `strict_multi_assign` flag.
```
